and we're live how are you sir how are
you good to see you again I'm thrilled
to be here thanks for doing this man
thanks for having I know I should tell
people before we get started I did not
know when I asked you to come back on
that you were heavily involved in this
whole vaccine debate what I wanted to
have you on to talk about is tropical
diseases because I remember when we did
that sci-fi show you explained to me
that some ungodly percentage of people
that live in tropical climates are
infected by parasites that's right well
my day job is developing vaccines for
tropical diseases we developed the
vaccines no one else will make because
they're for the world's poorest people
so we call them tropical diseases but
there really are diseases of poverty the
vaccine issue the the advocacy issue
around vaccines and autism is kind of a
new thing that I got drawn into just
because I'm a parent of an adult
daughter with autism and I make vaccines
so it was a natural that I'd get drawn
into it yeah so when I said that you're
gonna come on then I got inundated by
people that are you know the vaccine
thing is such a polarizing issue yeah
that's awful and so many people seem to
think they absolutely know what causes
what especially when it comes to
something like autism which is it's a
huge issue in this country it's a huge
issue around the world and it doesn't
didn't used to seem to be the question
is was that because it was undiagnosed
was that because it just there's it's
more prevalent today what do you think
what is your take on well I don't think
we really know one thing's for sure
we're diagnosing people with autism who
we diagnosed with as something else in
the past you know whether it was you
know really horrible diagnosis we'd use
pejorative terms like mental retardation
what's the matter Jamie just tell you
the clock is off oh okay sorry sorry
should we start again no no it's okay he
was just saying he was just telling me
that our clock is screwed up because the
daylight savings time right sorry I'm
totally unrelated towards the whole
countries
raucous critical yeah yeah so so we
don't know we don't well you know what
one thing is clear that the number of
diagnoses is going up but part of that
is because what we used to call
pejorative things like mental
retardation now get thrown into the
autism category the other thing that you
absolutely know so well you know now we
call it as part of the autism spectrum
we also because autism often has a lot
of Associated intellectual disabilities
not always but sometimes the other is
that I posit is that based on aptitude
tests like how do you how do they decide
what sought is yes they they have a list
of diagnostic categories but it's not
pretty sir it's not like you could test
someone if they test positive for a
disease that's right that's right well
as although it you know one of the
interesting side pieces to this is you
know the there's a group of people out
there who self-identified themselves as
the autistics and they get very
resentful or hurt when they're called a
disease or disorder they in because they
say well we're not in epidemic we're
we're a person and they that it's part
of this whole neuro diversity movement
which is quite interesting
neuro diversity movement right they say
they're neuro-diverse that they you know
maybe think differently from others and
they respond differently than others but
they're not quote abnormal and and I
think they have a good argument hmm I
heard a crazy argument once when someone
that so the point is that it's you know
the the impairment like Rachel my
daughter it's not so much for autism
that thoughts her you know ability to
have partners or to have a meaningful
career it's the fact that she has
profound in her case profound
intellectual disability that goes along
with it so when when they say that
people have there's a spectrum right and
some people who are autistic have
incredible abilities that's right they
have incredible mathematical abilities
musical abilities language abilities and
then some people do not some people have
wood
issues yeah but the Rachel's case my
daughter it's she has a pretty good
verbal IQ eighty ninety which is a very
low performance IQ in 40 she can't do
simple math she can't count money
fortunately Goodwill Industries came to
her rescue in our rescue and now she
works there two hours a day sorting
clothes and and that's been really
meaningful for her to get a paycheck oh
that's great even it was minimum wage
yeah right just to do something you know
right that doesn't feel part of the mix
yeah that's huge that's huge for
everyone r absolutely yeah absolutely
but so there's no there's it's not like
you could test positive for syphilis or
you can test positive for the flu right
although now you know as I say you know
so that's why I don't like using those
those terms because it it puts people on
the autism spectrum as though they have
a disease right or which I don't like to
do but if it is a disorder well you know
now we know there are 99 genes that are
linked to autism but why is it a bad
thing to say that you have a disorder if
it's just a disorder people have
disorders
well a fact well you know a lot of the
individuals in that that self-identify
themselves
autistics don't like to think of
themselves as a disorder they like to
think of themselves as different it's
different but not necessarily as a
disorder right but that doesn't help us
when we're trying to discuss it does it
yeah it gets very it it's it's hard gets
hard to talk about well also they're
trying to stop you from talking about it
in a certain fashion which is actually
accurate right you know when they have
an issue there is an issue to say
there's no issue is kind of ridiculous
it's I mean there's a reason why so many
people are so concerned about autism and
vaccines and just autism in general
whether it's an environmental pollution
factor as well what they like to do is
they like to make the distinction
between autism that neurodiversity thing
and actually having intellectual
disabilities that go along with it okay
maybe it's a bit of semantics also but
they feel strongly about it right now if
we don't know what causes autism what we
do we do well we're getting there very
closely so we've now there was a very
important paper produced written by a
group at the Broad Institute at Harvard
MIT which was one of the premier
genetics genomics organizations in the
country and they've now identified 99
genes it's a it's a huge team of
scientists not only at the Broad
including psi does a bailar College of
Medicine 99 genes involved in autism all
involved in early fetal development
early brain development in the first and
second trimester of pregnancy so now
we're starting to really get our arms
around what autism is and that's one of
the things I talk about in the book I
mean we we have learned so much in the
last couple of years about autism how it
begins early fetal development well
before kids ever see vaccines and that's
one of the reasons I say vaccines did
not cause Rachel's autism vaccines don't
cause autism because autism was already
underway in early early brain
development is it possible that some
people have this tendency towards autism
and it's exacerbated by vaccines I don't
think so um I think what what happens is
the sequence of events happens during
pregnancy but the full clinical
expression of autism often doesn't
happen until 18 or 19 months of age like
Rachel for instance wasn't actually
diagnosed until 19 months of age and
there's some fabulous studies now
showing that that clinical expression of
autism actually coincides with a big
increase in the expanding of the brain
you can actually show on cereal magnetic
magnetic resonance imaging cereal MRI
how the brain starts to the brain volume
starts to increase and that's very
important because parents will often
remember oh my kid got vaccinated on 18
months of age or 15 months of age you
want to link the two but now you can go
back to 6 months of age and as a studies
done at the University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill showing so that you could do
an MRI at 6 months of age and they can
predict now with they say with 90%
accuracy which of the kids will go on to
develop autism and then you could take
it what do they sing what what are they
saying
they can see star I have you have to go
we can go into detail in the paper but
they can see certain things on
signatures on MRI that tell them that
this kid is going to
to develop okay so in fact there is a
way to test positive for autism done
with this serial MRI that's what they
think right that's me and now we have
the 99 gene so we can even take it back
further by doing what's called whole
exome sequencing sequencing all the DNA
all the expressed DNA of an individual
in Rachel's case we did that and we
actually found a mutation in a gene
controlling neuronal connections which
makes a lot of sense if you think autism
yeah of course so so there is a way to
show whether children will be more
likely to develop autism and there's
there is a way to look at their brain
through fMRI at a very early age and and
also do the muscle do genetic sequence
so it's not simply a matter of how they
perform on cognitive tests that's right
that's right we're getting much better
at getting arms around the diagnosis why
do you think there's so many people that
have these anecdotal stories of their
child getting vaccinated especially
large doses of vaccines when they hit
them off like ten in a row and then all
of a sudden or meters measles mumps and
rubella is the one that gets repeated
over and over again that's the one that
made my child have autism I've heard
that so many times and I've heard it
from friends from friends that have
children that have autism they had a
child their child got the measles mumps
rubella shot and then immediately there
was a very distinct change in the
child's behavior well no question when
you get the measles mumps rubella
vaccine many times kids cry and things
like that and then autism will then
begin sometime between the first and
second year of life so it's logical to
want to connect the two but now we know
it's not even plausible because we know
that if you go back to that MRI at 6
months of age or go back prenatally we
can even determine which kids are going
to go out to develop autism so even
though this and that complementing it
complementing it our massive
epidemiologic studies done on over 1
million kids that in fact a new paper
was just released this week showing that
kids who get the EMR get the MMR vaccine
are no more likely to get autism than
kids who don't who don't get the MMR
vaccine and the conduct converse is also
true kids on the autism spectrum are no
more of likely to have gotten the Emma
vaccine the kids not on the autism
spectrum okay so so it's the combination
of that those big studies of over 1
million kids together with knowing what
autism is that completely rules out the
possibility right so these genes excuse
me the end the issue with these genes
and then the ability to scan the brain
with the serial MRI and so you can tell
which children have the propensity is it
possible that children have all these
issues and then do not get autism or do
100 percent of those children with those
issues get autism that's a good question
I don't know I'm a vaccine scientist so
I'm you know the not about the well well
I'm a biologist problem of vaccine
scientist who's really tried to do a
deep dive on autism
doing research on the book versus human
development right right okay so so what
you're saying though is that if a child
does not have these mutations and does
not have these issues that are present
and during a serial MRI that they will
not go on to develop autism is that true
as far as we can't as far as we can tell
so children without those issues who get
vaccinated have have no problems which
most children have no problems right
yeah I mean the you know we've learned a
lot about the the risk of vaccines and
the numbers are extraordinary I mean the
risk of a severe adverse event happening
after getting a vaccine is roughly on
the order of one in a million between
between one and a million and one in ten
million so and I found an Internet
report wants as a delight likelihood of
getting struck by lightning is 1 in
700,000 so it's you know the like having
a severe event after a vaccine is your
bet ads are better of getting struck by
lightning then and when you say severe
event what do you mean by severe event
though oh well there's actually a table
that's put out by the National Vaccine
Compensation Act
includes shoulder injury
that's one encephalitis a shoulder
injury yeah that's actually and from the
actual injection you put getting
injecting it in the wrong place
oh so it goes into the joint or
something like that yeah yeah
is that common no no so there there have
been issues where children have adverse
effects and reactions to vaccines what
do you attribute those to but one you
know one in a million I think you know
in some case biological variability I
think in some cases in terton Lee if
it's a live virus vaccine like the
measles mumps rubella vaccine and you
have an underlying immune deficiency
that wasn't picked up before then that
virus can replicate better but very rare
things like that right so as far as you
know children who are healthy who get a
vaccine is it's not biologically
possible for them to develop these
traits these mutations in the genes and
these issues that you see present as
best we can tell right now that seems to
be the case right as best you can tell
right now is a it's a great thing to say
right but for people that are like hmm
on the outside like what does that mean
I'm not a doctor I'm not smart enough to
understand what doctor Hotez is saying
right yeah what does he say well we can
tell can we tell so here's what we can
tell okay no studies and over 1 million
children that there's no link between
vaccines and autism that's number one
and and so let me let me parse this I
hope you've been to bits so there's
there's the studies on a 1 million
children showing that vaccines do not
cause autism that's part one the second
is that and then I'll do a deeper dive
on each of them the second part shows
not only is there massive evidence that
there's no link between vaccines and
autism
there's no plausibility because we know
so much about autism how it begins in
pregnancy incorrectly so let's go back
to the first part the first part is
studies and over 1 million children one
of the things that the anti vaccine
Lobby does is they played this game on
what I want - not really a game but what
they quote what they do is play this
kind of thing of vaccine whack-a-mole
because at first they alleged it was the
MMR vaccine
and now came out out of the study that
was published in The Lancet in 1998 then
another group came along and said no no
we didn't mean the MMR vaccine we meant
the thimerosal
preservative that used to be in vaccine
and the scientific community not only
dum AA dee bunked the MMR linked they
debunked the thimerosal Ling then the
anti vaccine lobby came along and said
no no we didn't mean that we're spacing
vaccines too close together then they
changed to get round again saying now
it's the Ala more aluminum in vaccines
so and then each time the scientific
community responds with massive
epidemiologic study showed there's
absolutely none of those things are true
and do you think that it's just when you
look at say if there's one in a million
that has an issue with this and there's
and that's not autism so whatever
whatever those issues are that they hear
these stories and these stories do
accumulate because there's 300 plus
million people in this country and over
10 20 years of 1 million you develop a
significant history of cases where
children did have issues with vaccines
so these people hear about these stories
and people are terrified obviously
you're I have children you become very
overprotective of your children you
worry a lot right and then you also
don't know like why do they get so many
shots all in a row like that why does a
baby get ten shots in a day that seems
crazy
well they don't get ten shots in a day
most of the vaccines are now combined so
for instance in one vaccine we can
vaccinate against diphtheria pertussis
tetanus polio Hamas influenza type B
which is a terrible cause of of
meningitis and in some cases not even
hepatitis so one shot soup well it's
combined and there's all sorts of
studies showing that it's safe to
combine them and it's fantastic now you
can vaccinate with one shot against six
diseases so and these are life
threatening disease right so the only
concern is the child's immune system
when they're bombarded with this one do
so a lot of times it causes the does it
be tired or their gets sick the
blindness the immune system is not bad
right that's another kind of it's nice
number that our misunderstanding that's
put out by the anti-vaccine lobby
remember the child's got the intestines
and the respiratory tree is is this or
are organs of antigen presentation a
baby on average is exposed to hundreds
of new antigens every day so the idea
that you're gonna quote overwhelm the
immune system with a vaccine against six
diseases just doesn't make any sense mmm
again this is all phony baloney stuff
put out by the anti vaccine Lobby let's
let's be clear the anti vaccine lobby
owns the internet right now they've what
does that mean what that means is
they've got they've put out now by some
estimates 500 anti vaccine websites so
that every time you put the word vaccine
into a search engine whether it's Yahoo
or Google you're gonna get anti vaccine
misinformation that's number one second
we know now it's amplified on social
media like Facebook other forms of
social media so third you know look at
the Amazon site I mean it's it's
incredible so my book this book the good
news is it's I think it's right now it's
the highest-rated probe vaccine book on
Amazon the bad news is overall its
ranked about 20 because there's 19 other
phony-baloney anti vaccine books so hey
that's oh the Amazon is the biggest
purveyor now of anti vaccine books and
wait it gets even worse then you also
have now they've become politicized they
have political action committees in
multiple states lobbying state
legislators about fault with applying
them with false information about what
VAX vaccines do so and and the problem
is we don't have a robust system of pro
vaccine advocacy to counter it so we
don't really hear as much as we need to
from the federal government from the CDC
from the Surgeon General so
unfortunately in this country the
defense of vaccines Falls to a handful
of academics like myself and you know
I'm an academic I wrote a book what
chance do I stand
this major media empire that why do you
think that exists why do you think there
is this major media empire that's
against vaccines
that's a great question what's the
motive what's the motivation number one
and number two where's the money coming
from right right there's real money
behind this millions of dollars behind
this to put out phony documentaries and
phony books what's a good phony
documentary to point to well I'm a
little reluctant to do it say it because
they're sold it teaches and and you know
I don't have the means to defend a
lawsuit and the correct that's these
documents which I usually don't name
specific
understand these documentaries what do
you think their motivation is do you
think they earn ously believe that
vaccines do cause harm or vaccines do
cuts
I use me autism I don't know I mean is
there some kind of other agenda that
they have I mean we do know in some
cases that the some elements of the anti
vaccine Lobby are promoting phony autism
therapies right they're doing terrible
things like this thing called MMS which
are bleach enemas what yeah bleach
giving bleach Anna must Achatz you
couldn't achieve the children bleach why
bleach because they're cleansing the
immune system cleansing them of toxin
though it's really awful stuff and
they're doing chelation therapy which is
very dangerous what is that that's where
they they claim you know kids are
overdosed with toxic metals so they give
a chemical that actually can chelate the
metal but it can kill at your calcium
and then put you into a fatal arrhythmia
as well they're also who is doing this
chelation therapy well you can Google
okay it's or whatever so these doctors
like in some cases there aren't doctors
unfortunately or other health
professionals and what does sure you
study the evidence lady gets work
there's no evidence and then and then
they're doing hyperbaric therapy which
is really bad so and some hyperbaric
therapy is bad well for doesn't do
anything for autism that's okay but it's
it's good for recovering from injuries
and yeah under certain selected sir but
who knows what who knows what it's doing
to a young kid right I mean so you
shouldn't be doing that
the then the other then
that's one so how much of this is being
driven by financial motivation peddling
these phony autism there means I can't
say my sense is that's not the big piece
of this yeah there's also some reports
not Russian BOTS and trolls that are
amplifying this and sewing political
instability in rhyme tree but again you
add that all up the phony autism
therapies the Russian Batson trolled in
my mind that really doesn't get our arms
around the big driver this thing so I
think we really need some good
investigative journalists to look into
this well do you think that there's some
sort of a concerted effort or do you
think that's your but just a bunch of
people that really believe that vaccines
do cause autism they don't truly
understand the science and they haven't
talked to someone like you and maybe
they have this idea that's cemented in
their mind and they're not willing to
look at it objectively and look at the
full spectrum of possibilities and look
at the science behind what you guys are
saying because in their head they've
been saying vaccines cause autism
they've been saying it for so long that
once someone gets that and they're
connected to that it's very difficult
for them to shift gears people have a
really hard time not being married to an
idea yeah no I agree that and you know
when I talk and I spend a lot of time
going around the country giving what are
called Grand Rounds lectures to
hospitals and medical schools pediatric
Grand Rounds so I've had the chance to
talk to a lot of pediatricians and
nurses and nurse practitioner and even
and more and more than a few parents my
impression is most of the parents are
who are called to be so-called vaccine
hesitant as is the word of the day are
not really deeply dug in I mean you can
yeah you can have a conversation with
them and explain to them like we're
talking now in a very you know
non-technical way you know the evidence
showing vaccines don't cause autism and
the lack of plausibility given that it
that it begins in pregnancy and they'll
vaccinate their kids there is another
percentage and I don't know what the
percentage is whether there's 10 15
percent that are deeply dug in
and are wholly invested in this
conspiracy theory that the that the
government is in cahoots with the
pharmaceutical companies and blahdy
blahdy yeah and then if you try to talk
them out of it
they just think you're part of the
conspiracy so it's sort of a no-win
approach there but but most parents you
can have a good conversation with most
parents yeah it's not necessarily even
most parents right I mean what what
you're dealing with is these people that
maybe they're into a bunch of different
alternate therapies a bunch of different
kinds of cleansing and you know there's
a lot of that nonsense that you find
online where I mean look there's
legitimate but I would I guess but I
guess my point sorry that's okay
please good no but I guess my point is
parents don't get the chance because
they're so inundated with phony anti
vaccine information that I do a Google
search yeah or whatever you know
whatever search they do so what do you
think should be done should there be a
probe vaccine documentary that makes
sense
I think thanks for that question I think
there's three things that need to be
done I think first of all some of this
anti vaccine media empire needs to be
dismantled this mantis mantled and in
that I can say whether they're wrong or
right like shouldn't I mean it seems
like there should be some sort of a
debate right like if there's someone
who's saying that there's some evidence
of vaccines cause debates you're saying
there's no evidence of vaccines cause
debate no excuse me that vaccines cause
autism and you're saying there's no
evidence that vaccines cause autism
there should be a debate where there's
some sort of a like some sort of a
monitored conversation where you can
have you versus someone else and break
this down yeah but that that has that's
a two-edged sword too because you know
then it gives some false legitimacy to
the anti vaccine side it's like debating
the smoking caused cancer yeah but
doesn't it isn't there already a problem
I mean it seems like if there's this
many if you do Google search and you're
just overwhelmed right with anti value
seems like the fight has already been
lost if that's the case that's right so
giving them legitimacy looks like it's
not necessarily giving them a legitimacy
it's giving them if you given you rather
a forum to dismiss their legitimacy yeah
I think you know part of it what has to
be done is means and and this gets into
all sorts of First Amendment issues and
I'm not a lawyer but you know the the
idea that Amazon now is putting out all
of these phony books and phony
documentaries well they're just a
distributor right yeah they don't have
to go over every book that they sell
with a fine-toothed but maybe they
should I mean I've mine tooth comb but
maybe there should be some screening
maybe Amazon maybe Facebook should all
be hiring chief scientific officer x' to
you know putting some stops on the
dissemination of information because
it's harming children right I mean I
mean this is the reason I get passionate
about it the reason I actually wrote the
book is kind of interesting I it
actually happened before all of these
big measles outbreaks that we have been
having yeah I mean I noticed that in
Texas there was where I my laboratories
at Texas Children's Hospital and Baylor
College of Medicine we noticed that
there was a steep increase in the number
of kids whose parents were opting them
out of getting vaccinated to the point
where in Texas we have over six almost
60,000 kids not getting their vaccines
in the state of Texas and those are the
ones we know about we don't know
anything about the 325,000 homeschooled
kids so we probably have over a hundred
thousand kids not getting vaccinated all
because of this misinformation campaign
and I was really troubled by the fact
that there was no response to it and
that was drove me to write the book so
the point is now Texas is very
vulnerable to measles outbreaks and I
say measles more than the others because
that's the most highly contagious
disease what's the danger of a child
getting measles so is there any benefit
to a child getting measles in terms of
their immune system no there's no
benefit and that's one of the phony
books they put out yeah Melanie's
marvelous measles I mean it's it's awful
so what did they say in that book they
say build your immune system it does not
it does not it's remember after so let's
go back a little bit smallpox was
eradicated in the late 1970s through
vaccinations one smallpox was eradicated
gate radicand measles was arguably the
single leading killer of children
globally 2.6 million children died every
year of measles because it causes
measles pneumonia
encephalitis talk about permanent
neurologic injury that's a bad actor
measles and then deafness at all and
then through global vaccination
campaigns we brought it down by the year
2002 about half a million kids dying and
then the Gates Foundation put up seven
hundred and fifty million dollars to
create the GAVI Alliance the Global
Alliance for vaccines and immunization
we've brought it down now to a hundred
thousand but now measles is coming back
Europe's a disaster right now we've got
80,000 measles cases in 2018 in Europe
and now it's coming back to the US and
so my worry is this me the anti vaccine
media empire isn't it started out as a
fringe group but now it's really
affecting public health allowing a
deadly disease like measles to come back
do you think if there's some sort of
definitive evidence that shows to the
general public like you could you could
show it to them like this is what causes
autism we've narrowed it down to these
genes and it it has nothing to do with
vaccines if you give these vaccines to
people without these genes there is no
way they're gonna get autism they get
autism specifically because of these
variations in their genes you just you
just summarize the book right yeah but I
mean that we need more than a book yeah
it does disturb me when I hear about all
these kids getting measles and and not
just measles but means in some places
polio is made a resurgence you know well
polio you know we're down to about three
three countries that still have
transmission of wild-type polio it's
Nigeria Pakistan Afghanistan so
hopefully we're getting our arms around
polio but measles has now come back
roaring back with a vengeance it hasn't
having people contracted polio outside
of those areas I mean those are the
areas where it's a problem every now and
then some cases pop up we had some you
know wherever it and this can get it on
to a whole nother topic wherever there's
collapse in health systems
infrastructure yes is during from war
political instability these diseases can
come back they can come back and the
people that are vulnerable the children
that are not immunized that's right and
when you're immunized you're not
vulnerable that's right yeah this is
it's a really confusing thing for people
because on the outside they will people
always want to think that big pharma but
I've said some terrible things about big
and the reason being is painkillers
because painkillers and antidepressants
and there's the SSRIs which are over
prescribed and the painkiller one kills
me because I have no people directly
that have been addicted to these goddamn
things and the doctors are passing them
out like candy so people look at big
farm as being oh these are the monsters
that push this they're also the people
that give you things that save people's
lives yeah there's a lot going on there
yeah I'm know I'm a little big defender
of of the big pharmaceutical companies I
mean one of the things that the empty
backs the insults that anti-vaxxers hurl
let me as they say I'm a shill for
industry they say I'm secretly taking
money from Merck and yaksa Smith glass
all crap I'm we don't I don't take a
penny from them and I and I and that's
it's not even how do you say just but
you from the University I get paid by
the University and some of that some of
my salaries offset by not grants from
nonprofit foundations then this is
because like the Nationals right and
then they say I'm secretly making
millions of dollars for our vaccines for
hookworm and schistosomiasis and Chagas
what you do with all that money because
my wife says if only that were the case
right these are diseases of the poorest
of the poor elementra make up a penny on
these disease so in fact you know one of
the frustrations I have with the big
pharmaceutical companies is we've gotten
will have made a lot of progress of
their vaccines we've gone all the way
from discovery through early phase
process development and manufacturing
and IND filing with the FDA
investigational new drug applications
but we're getting kind of stuck at phase
one phase two clinical trials because we
don't have the big pharma money to take
us all the way the licensure so I've had
a lot of meetings with the big
pharmaceutical companies to see if they
can partner with us and so far that
hasn't happened so has there ever been
any discussion or any interest in
creating some sort of a compelling
documentary that's Pro vaccinations that
can counter all these things because
there's there's quite a few
health-related documentaries that I know
are horseshit because I've talked to
actual real scientists and clinical
researchers that say like all these
things are saying it wrong and this is
why they're wrong in this you could show
this they're wrong and then when someone
says hey I saw this document
it says that all you should eat is toast
you could say listen man you got to go
here and watch this and it'll show you
why that's nonsense
right is there anything like that right
now there's any discussion not right now
there are some discussions but we're a
long way off from that and the problem
is the anti-vaccine documentaries are
being distributed widely sold and and
those people that are talking about it
here's the other problem whenever I talk
to someone about them as I've been doing
this a lot lately or to talk to someone
about something that passionate about I
go what books you read on it it was like
well I saw this documentary well very
and there are books yeah in fact there's
99 bullshit in nineteen ahead of mine
right books that are written by actual
researchers people that have spent
decades in labs understanding what's
going on
you don't really you know you don't get
a lot of that from the people that are
anti anything right well that's that's
what I wrote the new book it's a very
confusing thing for parents because
you're scared you know you have this
little tiny baby that you love more than
anything in this world and then the
doctors say hey we've got this round of
vaccines coming and you're just
terrified that you're gonna do something
to your child's can you turn your child
into someone who's compromised yeah and
and the point is problem is these
diseases are back now and so it the
agency to vaccinate is now more than
ever I mean remember right now look
what's going on in Vancouver Washington
right now where the measles outbreak is
under way the ones who are at greatest
risk are infants under the age of 12
months not yet old enough to get their
vaccine so that if you're a parent right
now living in Vancouver Washington
you're terrified you're terrified about
taking your baby out the Walmart ER
because they can take that vaccine
because they're never give you access
right right so now the disease is coming
back because the older kids are catching
it and the and the anti vaccine lobby
uses terms like personal liberties and
medical freedom well where the personal
liberties of this parent now who
terrified the taker in when you say to
her infant anti vaccine lobby now I know
that Robert Kennedy jr. is he's a he's a
big one he's a big one and he seems like
a very intelligent guy how could he not
be aware of the science behind this
is he getting wrong what what he's
getting wrong is just about everything
you know he's formed an organization
called children's health defense and and
start he had a press conference about it
I think it was September October of last
year it is probably one of the best
organized anti vaccine groups out there
now he's doing other things other than
vaccines he's doing a lot of things
about environmental health and things
like that I don't know any part of that
business I've only followed what they
what he does with vaccines but it's all
it's all nonsense why is he doing this
about vaccines don't know what's as well
I mean you have to ask him what's his
motive would he be a guy that you would
want to have a debate with or have a
discussion with but again I mean I I'm
I'm uncomfortable with the idea of a
debate because it's like it's like
debating I don't know it's like debating
a Holocaust denier or whether the
Holocaust exists I mean not that this
rises I understand what you're saying
but if you're again I want to bring this
up if you're complained there's 19 books
ahead of yours that are anti vaccine
books you've already lost the battle
like it's time to regroup and maybe
regrouping would be confronting someone
with actual scientific information I
mean you are a real doctor you're a guy
who actually studies this and you're a
man who understands the science you're a
legitimate academic you could you could
actually put a dent in this with a real
conversation yeah potentially
potentially yeah I mean what would he be
able to say like what is his taking on
it well remember he's uh he's an
attorney and he's he's very clever right
and right now he knows how to presumably
knows how to do arguments in court and
what am i of a scientists right but do
you think that he wants to deceive
people or do you think that maybe he's
just incorrect in his accumulation of
data yeah I can't say what his
motivation is but um his his his
information is is highly misleading hmm
now what else is you say the lobby is
this an organized thing good question I
mean again we need somebody who really
wants to do a deep dive in this and kind
of dissect out the pieces yeah to
understand but it's it's impressive what
you've got out there in terms of the
hundreds of websites and you have
vacation on social media and everything
else is it are there just one or two or
three groups behind it or is it a random
collection of organizations right that
that needs to be looked at that does
need to be now what what do you think is
causing autism and in your personal
estimation do you think that it is a
that there's a rise in the factors that
are causing autism or do you think that
it's a rise in the understanding of
these variables that contribute to it
that you could diagnose people with and
that before they were previously
undiagnosed so I think most of it is
that that we're just diagnosing it more
we're including individuals in the
autism category that we didn't before
and by the way the numbers are about to
go up even more because we're getting
better at diagnosing girls and women
with autism which is also quite
interesting we used to say it was ten to
one boys to girls and now we know there
are a lot more girls and women on the
autism spectrum it's just that they're
usually more verbal and they can
camouflage it better but they have very
high rates of comorbidities like
obsessive-compulsive disorder attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder a lot of
the teenage girls with eating disorders
now they're finding could actually be on
the autism spectrum so the numbers are
about to go up again I mean that's just
an example I mean is I guess what you're
really trying to get at is it is it
beyond that is there is there an a
bonafide increase beyond the number of
diagnosis and and that one I'm still not
sure about yeah I read an article about
early onset gender dysphoria being
connected to young girls or autism right
you know there's a disproportionate
number of girls with gender dysphoria
who turned out to be also autistic right
I've heard that as well yeah that's
actually so it's really fascinating yeah
think about now unfortunate and
fascinating at the same yeah there's
there's um there's a nice paper by a
very good environmental scientist named
Phil Landrigan who used to be at Mount
Sinai now I think he's at Boston College
now and he publishes about five or six
chemicals in the environment which if
you're exposed to for long periods of
time during early pregnancy your child
will be born with some features that
resemble
do you know what those chemical so I
have to remember I talked about it in
the book on what one of them is depakote
valproic acid which is a psychiatric
medicine used as a mood stabilizer or an
antidepressant so prolonged use of
depakote during pregnancy has been
linked to something that resembles
autism as a common medication it's a
common medication but now that we know
this information we don't use it anymore
and so one of the things that i've been
saying to you know people like bobby
kennedy and everything else if you
really want if you really think there's
some environmental linked to autism
we've got a list of at least six
chemicals during early exposure and
pregnancy that are probably causing
mutations and things like that that are
leading to autism why aren't we and why
isn't anybody looking into that hmm it's
just crazy I mean so all the focus on
goes into vaccines and it kind of sucks
all the oxygen out of the room so that
you know really understanding the search
for autism gets delayed or in some cases
doesn't get pursued at all or the other
thing that happens in many state
legislatures and things like that the
focus is so much about vaccines that we
don't talk about what autism parents
really need I mean what do I need for
Rachel we need you know employment
counseling and help we need mental
health counseling what do we do after
we're gone Rachel right now is living
with us I'm turned 60 my wife is you
know 58 what happens to us 10 15 20
years from now there's no roadmap right
so so all of that gets shunted aside
because of these phony-baloney
anti-vaccine argument that's why I get
angry that's when I start to realize
these guys in addition to affecting
public health are actually hurting
autism families as well well that makes
sense I mean and I can completely
understand why this would upset you
especially as a scientist now when
you're talking about these various
chemicals that you think do contribute
to or possibly cause autism
maybe we should really concentrate on
that and and publish something about
this is this something that these are an
article that people can go to that says
something about this there is I I talked
about it in the book in the book and I
could if I opened up the book I could
provide it for you is there anything
that people can
read online about this without going to
your book probably you know one of the
problems that we face in this country is
that we put a lot of scientific articles
behind paywalls
right as a real source of frustration
for me and why do they do that well one
of the reasons one of the things that
I've done now is I'm one of the I
founded a an open access journal called
the Public Library of Science neglected
tropical diseases so that anybody with a
computer you know an internet connection
and a printer can download the articles
free of charge and we need more of that
that's great but right now if someone
wants to find out these chemicals they
have to buy your book or buy some sort
of access to scientific pay yes I'm not
sure what that particular paper whether
it's behind a paywall or not on the book
there I mean besides measles what other
diseases are more prevalent now because
of people not vaccinating their kids the
ones that there's three diseases that I
worry about the most actually for well
whooping cough is another one so that's
one but the other one I worried about is
the flu vaccine kids aren't getting
their flu vaccine last year and the 2018
flu epidemic a hundred and fifty
unvaccinated kids died of influenza
despite the recommendation of accident
can you enlighten me on this because
what I've been told is that sometimes
they get the flu vaccine wrong so you
can get vaccinated but it doesn't
doesn't protect you for the strain of
flu that everybody's getting well so
that's again something that was heaven
idea I was heavily pushed by the anti
vaccine Lobby here's the story you're
right last partially right last year the
there was not a perfect match between
the between the the virus and the
vaccine the killed virus and the vaccine
and the wild type flu strain that was
out there but it was good enough to
prevent you from dying and it was good
enough to would likely prevent you from
being hospitalized so would in effect
even if you did get that's right because
it was enough cross protection so that
it would it would mitigate the symptoms
that's confusing to people because if
they have the flu they say oh well that
it didn't work that's right but it did
because it preventing you from getting
sick and dying and and again that was
that was a message that never really got
out
20 okay so let's talk about someone like
me who's a healthy person I've had the
flu before but I don't usually get a flu
shot that's crazy you should watch the
knowledge especially now as you're
getting older was because flu is one of
the leading it's probably the single
leading infectious disease killer of
adults in the United States but every
time I've had it it's really been like
just a couple of days out I rest well
you got a lot of fluids you got lucky my
friends yeah well you know sure I mean
let's so if you look at the eighty
thousand adults who died and the
influenza epidemic of 2018 in the United
States you're right a lot of them had
underlying things like diabetes or
non-communicable cardiovascular disease
or underlying respiratory disease maybe
they were smokers but that durst but
they're still thought but they're still
thousands of individuals who are
perfectly healthy who died of influenza
that we know so and you don't get your
flu vaccine you're taking a terrible
check and and why not well I mean what
what are you risking by getting the flu
fax I'm busy bro you know what you know
you know where I you know where I get my
vaccinations Walgreens even better like
we have a big grocery store chain and
Texas a big supermarket called h-e-b to
get it up the nose I get now I get it I
get the injection right the pharmacists
the farm all of my vaccines I've gotten
for the last few years have been given
by the pharmacists interesting so
couldn't be easier are you have you ever
gotten the flu since you've been getting
the vaccine every year uh well you know
I've gotten I've gotten sick with like a
cold like a like a sore throat and
feeling crummy was that a mild case of
flu I can't really tell okay but you've
never gotten sick right after you got a
vaccine some people do right no some
people do get a vaccine and then they
have an adverse reaction to sometimes
you know after getting your vaccine you
can get you get some soreness and you
can feel maybe a slight fever for a few
hours or a day but usually it's you're
fine what is that what is that yeah what
is that fever why are you getting a
fever because the
Cina stimulating the immune system and
stimulating the inflammatory system so
even though you feel like you're getting
sick because the vaccine is actually
good for your immune system that that's
right and you're not really sick I mean
it's nothing like is nearly as bad as
getting the flu the other vaccine
neither you're getting up there you have
to start considering is the shingles
vaccine Shing Grix and that's a that's a
great vaccine it hurts though for a
couple of days do you take care of your
immune system in other ways do you take
probiotics are you cautious about your
diet I'm not as clashes about my diet is
I should be I'm a junk food a holic
actually well that seems like a terrible
thing for your health it is a terrible
thing for my health and something my
wife is working on it but that seems
ridiculous for someone who works with
health yeah yeah sometimes man I just I
get it right
how often what how often how often do I
steal a bag of chips or something like
garbage uh I don't know no no hopefully
not every day but you know maybe a
couple of times a week oh that's what I
Rachel my my daughter with autism that's
like our thing is to go to the it's
called the burger joint door to Shake
Shack together to get a cheeseburger
what sticks the sneaks on fries so mmm
so you live in large we call it like
that mouths pleasure so much you're
willing to sacrifice a little bit I am
yeah I you know I you know I can I have
to concede that's the case well there's
I mean I don't have to tell you but
there's a large body of data that
connects poor diet to a host of diseases
that seems like a crazy decision for a
guy in your line of work there you go
sometimes the sometimes the it's not all
brain it's it's something else but I
mean if you ate healthy food I mean the
thing is your body starts craving
healthy food you start feeling ya know
no question no question about it
do you take vitamins I don't take quite
it's real yeah Wow I don't think they're
neither cuz most limits in the American
up hold up hold up you don't think
they're needed where you're eating junk
food well
I'm not only eating junk food you know
there's a large body of clinical
research on the efficacy of vitamins
especially vitamins D vitamin I have
taken vitamin D for periods the
recommendation of my internist in what
about essential fatty acids which are
great for your brain
fish oil all these different things that
are fantastic I'm not gonna I'm not
gonna argue with you got it you got it
over me listen the but it would you
would have a much better argument that
you're making my wife stay here you're
taking care of yourself a hundred
percent but you still need but you still
need your vaccines I'm sure you do but
vaccines aren't gonna prevent cancer no
that's true right there's a lot of
diseases or diabetes or cardiovascular
disease a lot of these diseases are
connected directly to diet yeah come on
and the other lifestyle change yeah
sedentary life I try to go on the
treadmill for 30 minutes from work I do
it actually I'm pretty good about that
yeah thirty minutes every morning I'll
just go for a natural walk it's more
interesting I did that too sorry I don't
I don't know but I deal with thirty
minutes on the treadmill in the morning
and then I might take a long walk with
my wife in the evening oh that's good
but we know that the thing that knocks
the crap out used to travel yes I find
that very frustrating because you know
exercise rate and then you eat you don't
eat well well and you don't control the
diet as well so that's well I have a
solution to that and eat well and
exercise those are those the solutions
to that just do it you know I treated
like I'm brushing my teeth I brush my
teeth every day yeah I exercise every
day too
yeah so when I travel I don't have an
option when I land I go to the gym this
is how it goes
I'll and I get my hotel room I put my
short-term yeah yeah I did that too I do
that too it's the only way yeah if you
have to do it if you say this is just
what gets done right this is how you do
it yeah I try to be really compulsive
about that so yeah I have a written now
I know what I'm gonna do especially if
it's great if the hotel is a good gym
the whole kill you know if they have
weights and a bunch of therefore I'll
run outside if we don't you run yeah do
you not very well but know what you do
okay yeah we gotta get you a healthy
buddy yeah can't be pushing
only chemicals and injectable forms to
facilitate health fair enough
yeah not chemicals or vaccines I'm sorry
what's in them what I mean it's some
sort of chemical no no other antigens
right there are there a fluid
macromolecules
what's the liquids typically it would be
saline or you know salt water and that
now what is missing from today's vaccine
protocol if anything in terms of
diseases we should be vaccinating for
both laughing yeah there certainly are
you know one of them is a big big
problem among young infants especially
premature infants called RSV respiratory
syncytial virus infection what does that
come from it's you know it's a
respiratory virus that Peaks are on the
same time that flu does so it's a very
severe respiratory illness so this is
again one of those vaccines that's not a
big moneymaker so the bill Melinda Gates
Foundation is trying to provide grants
for supporting that one that that's a
good one and then there are all the
diseases that affect poor people both in
developing countries and even among the
poor in the United States this book
that's that's the next one called marble
health the next one so this is not
released yet oh this is out this
actually this actually preceded the okay
now this book is all about poor people
and infectious diseases and that the
rise of these infectious diseases even
in the United States that's right so you
know when we think about so all right
all right
you know let let this big campaign to
raise awareness of something called
neglected tropical diseases or entities
these are the most common afflictions of
people living in poverty I call them the
most important disease you've never
heard of their diseases like
schistosomiasis and Jacques disease and
leishmaniasis and have been devoting my
life to seeing if we could develop
vaccines for those diseases in the
nonprofit sector you know because the
big pharmaceutical companies just don't
see just aren't going to take these on
so we're trying to do it in a non profit
sector but this book the blue marble
health book
came out of some number crunching that I
did using data from the World Health
Organization or something called the
Institute for Health metrics and
evaluation which is based in Seattle
Washington that found something very
surprising and that is most of the
world's poverty related diseases are not
necessarily in the poorest most
devastated countries of Africa
meaning like Democratic Republic of
Congo or Central African Republic
they're there but on the numbers basis
most of these poverty related diseases
are actually in the g20 economies the 20
wealthiest economies together with
Nigeria which is not a g20 country but
it has an economy bigger than the bottom
three or four so that was pretty amazing
for me to find that out because you know
at first I would I didn't believe the
numbers because I said well how could it
be if their poverty related diseases why
are they in the 20 wealthiest economies
and then I realized that it's among the
poor living in wealthy countries so the
poorest of the rich today now account
for most of the world's poverty related
diseases and what what's the cause of
this
so why the link with poverty so that's a
great core so one of the things I do in
the book is I ask that well what is it
about poverty that's making you
susceptible I don't think we really know
I mean clearly in some cases if you live
in poor dilapidated housing without
window screens things like mosquitoes
and kissing bugs and sand flies can get
inside the house or if you look in in
poor neighborhoods so I can turn around
Houston you see a lot of environmental
degradation or or on the neighborhood
mmm
you see discarded tires that breed is
gyp time mosquito or standing water but
I think what what what did tires do so
yeah so one of the best habitats for the
mosquito that transmits dengue and Zika
and chikungunya and yellow fever are
discarded tires that's what they love so
this you know if you go into poor
neighborhoods you'll see a lot of tired
dumping for instance and and that's
those are habitats for that eighty is a
chip time mosquito including here in
Southern California
when the water gets in the top that's
right a little bit of water that's
exactly it yeah I you know I moved into
a house once in Encino down the street
from here in fact and no one had lived
in the house for about a year and a half
two years and the pool had not been
taken care of and I went out into the
pool and it was green and there were
schools of mosquitoes sceeto heaven
Macedo house yeah so strange so you so
yeah absolutely you go into poor
neighborhoods abandoned swimming pools
things like that that's that's where
we're getting a number of these diseases
we don't have very many mosquitoes in
Southern California I mean it's really
kind of amazing in that regard like well
it depends so you know some counties
where they do aggressive spring and
things like that you won't but in many
counties you're probably probably some
of the poorer counties poor districts
you still do well I mean in terms of the
way it is on the East Coast like I grew
up in Boston and in the summertime you
just have fucking mosquitoes everywhere
they just can't get away from them and
then I've been to Alaska which is the
craziest place I've ever been to in my
life in terms of mosquitoes right have
you been
I haven't been to Alaska it's hilarious
you get out of your car and they attack
you like a horde of birds that's because
you only get one month of the CEO
exactly yeah so they're super aggressive
and they're also very large the big
problems along the Gulf Coast of the US
we have that ADEs chip type mosquito and
that's why I got so worried about Zika
virus in the Gulf coast of the US yeah
mosquitoes and other countries obviously
contain malaria I mean we've been very
fortunate that that's never made it over
to here
well no we we used to have malaria used
to be widespread in the United States
both the one that was was a real killer
disease called falciparum malaria on the
gulf coast and even up into Illinois in
the Ohio River Valley we had a lot of
malaria
when was this my five acts in the 1800s
in fact there's a whole there's a book
written by Dickens when he visited the
United States called Martin Chuzzlewit
know when he describes all these sickly
people in Illinois and Cairo Illinois
and the confluence of the Mississippi
and the Ohio River he's clearly
describing malaria why
I did not know so what stopped it so
that's a great question we so there's
actually a very nice book written by a
medical historian that Duke University
named Margaret Humphreys called malaria
race and poverty and she has a
hypothesis but I think she's on to
something that it the decrease the
malaria dropped in associated with
aggressive economic development so that
the FDR's New Deal included something
called the Agricultural Adjustment Act
that got people off of off of with
agrarian pursuits and put them into
factories quality housing went up and
that's probably what caused a lot of the
reduction in these tropical diseases
remember they're really diseases of
poverty in fact I spent a lot of time
working in China and I'm seeing that
play out right now in China in China is
had this very very aggressive program of
economic development mostly in the
eastern part of the country but in the
southwest part of the country going to
Yunnan Sichuan provinces you go back in
time 75 years and you still see those
diseases so spread do you think that the
best cure or the best way to stop
malaria would be just to increase the
economy of these areas in Africa where
they're experiencing it clearly economic
development is a very potent driver now
what it is about economic development we
still don't have our arms around that
yet but economic development is very
important just like for the neglected
tropical diseases we studied but you
know unfortunately for many countries
economic development is still decades
away so that's why that's the rationale
for developing these vaccines is it
because economic development moves
people into more urban environments
where there's less tropical diseases I
think that's part of it although now
we're seeing some tropical diseases
thrive in urbanized environments like
you know yellow fever and Zika and
dengue as well so it's not only
urbanization you has to be urbanization
with good planning that's not done
uncheck that outstrips the
infrastructure in terms of water and
sanitation so this brings me to the
thing that I wanted to talk to you about
in the first place because this is what
you brought up to me when we were doing
this sci-fi show and you said something
to me that has been haunting me ever
since
that the vast majority of people that
live in tropical climates have parasites
mm-hmm
vast a jar yep that's right that that's
right there's things like Toxoplasma
gondii and so let's look at the let's
look at the hit parade right the top one
is one called ascariasis intestinal
roundworm the estimates are on 800
million people have asked around worms
in their bellies Wow
so so more than 1 in 10 people on the
planet mostly people who live in extreme
poverty 400 million have hookworm
infection 400 million have whip worse a
lot of these are wormy diseases 200
million people with scabies which is an
ecto parasite on the skin that causes
terrible itching and secondary bacterial
infections schistosomiasis is another
one the point is every almost every
single person who is in extreme poverty
has one of these what I call neglected
tropical diseases and one of the
interesting features about them is
they're very debilitating they not so
that not only occur in the setting of
poverty but I think they reinforce
poverty because they make people too
sick to go to work they make they
actually shape we can show they shave IQ
points off of kids when they have them
well this is the hookworm connection
today the idea of the slack-jawed dumb
southerner right right United States of
America right and now one of the things
that we have found so rehalia mejia on
my faculty working with environmental
activists named Katherine Coleman
flowers and Alabama found that hookworm
is still present in Alabama people so
they understand what we're talking about
because for the longest time there was
this stereotype about people that lived
in the south that they were dull minded
right and that this could be directly
connected to hookworm infection which
had run rampant right there was even the
term given called they called the germ
of laziness then the hookworm infection
because it causes severe anemia so if
you're walking around with terrible
anemia of course you're - you're not
feeling up to working a full day and all
that sort of stuff right hookworm was
wildly president and the president in
the southeastern United States the turn
of the
20th century and then as malaria went
down with economic development so did
hookworm infection as well but we still
have pockets in this country and this
wasn't understood at the time right they
didn't know that these people were
infected with hookworm Freight for for
forever no up until very recently so the
cause of hookworm wasn't discovered till
1900 what is that cause it's called
Nicator americanus the American killer
is and that's the name of the worm and
this I'm walking barefoot or that goes
in through the hands or you know enters
all parts of the body so that's very
common to get it from walking barefoot
that's right which was more common in
the south right right one so that's one
of the diseases we've made a vaccine for
the snow in clinical trials hmm yeah
when I found that one out I was like oh
my god well that's it that totally makes
sense because for the longest time was
there was that stereotype and then when
you find out that it's directly
connected to a massive infection of this
disease worm so these are the diseases
that are holding back people who live in
poverty originally I thought only in
places like the poorest countries in
sub-saharan Africa or Southeast Asia but
now I realize it's these pockets of
poverty across the entire planet that
people are affected by these disease and
these diseases can be vaccinated that's
where we're trying to prove that we can
make a vaccine again and there is a
hookworm vaccine right right now in
clinical trials just in clinical that's
right now wasn't there a Lyme disease
vaccine but the problem was it was
actually causing people to get Lyme
disease so that's a talk about
controversial topics that so there was a
Lyme disease vaccine that was developed
actually from a colleague of mine at
Yale University and then it was and they
licensed it I think it was to
GlaxoSmithKline and they developed it as
they called it Lyme Rex
it was the Lyme disease vaccine and
actually most of the study suggests that
actually worked pretty well the problem
was there were a number of people who
felt that the vaccine made them worse or
they said they had chronic Lyme disease
that wasn't effective so it was really a
market perception problem more than
anything else and ultimately it hurt the
bottom line of the company and they they
withdrew it good friend of Mines dad got
the vaccine and then got Lyme disease
they think he got
Lyme disease from the vaccine probably
not probably is a weird word well that's
a nice no he didn't get Lyme disease no
way impossibly impossible because Lyme
disease is caused by the Lyme bacteria
at the spirochete called Borrelia
burgdorferi and the vaccine is not a
live vaccine it's a recombinant protein
based vaccine so it's not though so
there's nothing in that vaccine that
could have caused this adverse reaction
that they directly attribute to that
vaccine probably not again your same
problem I don't know the patient won't
even examine the injury so I hate they
swear I mean that's the narrative of
that household well again you know
what's reinforced by a lot of negative
information out there on the Internet
yeah but it's also reinforced by the
fact they pulled the vaccine yeah well
they pulled the vaccine not because it
wasn't working but because of market
perception and in all that sort of and
that was a time before the number of
cases of Lyme disease have really taken
off so that seems strange to me because
they didn't pull the measles mumps
rubella vaccine because of perception
why would they pull the Lyme disease
vaccine because of perception I think
the reason was is because the the
cost-benefit equation works a little
differently um with measles measles is a
killer disease Lyme disease was not a
killer disease and Wrekin people now in
some cases it seems to be connected to a
host of other ailments - correct like
Lyme disease exacerbates a bunch of
different maybe possibly even existing
health issues well you have to be
careful you know the the and this gets
into another controversial rabbit hole
I'm not sure we want to get into or not
today but you know the infectious
disease Society of America for instance
has come out with a strong statement
saying that there's really no such thing
as chronic Lyme disease and the
scientific evidence does not support
something called chronic Lyme disease
yet there are lots of people suffering
with chronic debilitating illness who
claim that it's caused by Lyme disease
yes so this is something that is out
there right now why is there a debate
like what is the what are they saying
that it there is no such thing as
chronic Lyme disease what's their
evidence
the evidence is that there's no evidence
that they can detect spirochetes in the
body in many cases people who have had
Lyme disease don't have persistent
evidence of having antibodies any longer
- through the Lyme spirochete so it's a
whole different area right but they do
have this chronic inflammation and pain
in their joy they have somebody starts
breaking down they have something but it
doesn't seem to the infectious disease
Society of America which is one of the
leading infectious disease bodies in our
country and I'm not an expert on Lyme
disease so I'm not too comfortable going
there with you are they're saying that
there's no evidence that that that's
actually associated with active
infection with Lyme disease what are
they how are they describing it and what
how are they so another what so what's
causing all the decent unknown unknown
hmm but isn't it bizarre the same people
got Lyme disease first and then how
about these host of issues afterwards
well the I guess part of the problem is
in some cases they had Lyme disease
first in some cases they really didn't
have Lyme disease unfortunately there
are a number of unscrupulous health care
providers and even physicians out there
that are making the misdiagnosis either
they're making a misdiagnosis of Lyme
disease or in some cases they're
actually taking everyone who comes
through the door and diagnosing them
with Lyme disease mmm I'm sure you're
aware the Lone Star tick rain the
allergy to red meat yeah right that's
really fascinating yeah yeah well
actually all tick borne diseases are on
the rise now yeah possibly because of
climate change which is another factor
in our country that's doing that so
we're seeing you know if you look now at
what are the big drivers of infectious
diseases right now in the and not only
in the US but globally there are really
some interesting forces and a lot of
them are social determinants so a big
one is poverty that's that's a huge one
the other big one is political
instability in war because it interrupts
public health control measures so for
instance Venezuela which was leading
Public Health Control in Latin America
for dead
Cades you know with the collapse of the
economy in the Shabbos era now into the
Medora area Medora area we've got a
terrible situation where we've had
measles return in a big way so huge
numbers of cases of measles we've had
all the neglected tropical diseases come
back as well as malaria Chagas disease
leishmaniasis so it's really interesting
how that is destabilizing the whole
region because now Venezuela has one of
the largest diasporas of people as big
as the Diaspora coming out of Syria and
Iraq so now the diseases are moving into
adjacent areas of Brazil and Colombia
and Ecuador and so it's really and
that's another big drivers political
instability the third one we think is
climate change may be very important so
you know why did we see this big surge
of chikungunya virus infection in the
Western Hemisphere or Zika we don't
really understand the forces of that and
what's going on in southern Europe right
now is quite concerning we've had
malaria returned to Greece after it's
been gone for 70 years malaria is
returned to Italy we're seeing
schistosomiasis and neglected tropical
disease on the island of Corsica
we've got dengue chikungunya West Nile
virus across Italy Spain Portugal so
we're trying to understand why that is
and there's some thought that climate
change may be a big driver of that now
what other infectious diseases or
parasites rather do they have vaccines
for do they have a vaccine for talks oh
there's no vaccine for toxoplasmosis
there's a prototype malaria vaccine
that's yeah well that's it's an X
there's a malaria vaccine it's called
mas Couric's that's the trade name that
was developed supported but with a lot
of funding from the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation and working in
partnership with GlaxoSmithKline and
that malaria vaccine now has been
approved for use in children by the
european medicine agency and it's being
introduced now in three countries in
africa Malawi Ghana
and I forget the third one I think it's
tense is there an adverse reaction that
people have that's tough because I know
the traditional malaria medication I had
friends that took it and had horrible
nightmares
oh yeah malaria ms terrible yeah gives
you very little or no and so there when
you say children how old are the
children that they're at vaccinating
with this well the problem that you get
into with malaria is that before six
months of age you have maternal
antibodies unborn you're one of the rich
are born with antibodies from your
mother and they'll start Delaine by six
months of age so the ones who get
hospitalized with measles what's called
cerebral malaria which is a devastating
condition or severe malaria anemia which
is also a killer are those children
between six months of age and five years
of age so those are the ones that we
want to protect now and it's one of the
leading killers of children globally
right right and and we don't end the
vaccine sickle-cell is connected to it
correct right sickle-cell is it has
something to do with people developing
an immunity to malaria yeah that's it
I'm surprised you knew that it's not
from Tiffany Haddish who's Tiffany habit
how dare you she's a very funny comedian
okay I'm sure she is but she's well
she's like wow it's it's not really
immunity but it's a natural protection
so individuals who have the sickle cell
trait or seem to be partially resistant
to malaria hmm and that's the thinking
why the gene for sickle cell has been
preserved in Africa for so long is
because it does confer some protection
against malaria so it's a reason for
keeping the gene in the gene pool yeah
we were actually discussing it because a
friend that I grew up with died from it
so it seems to only exist in African
Americans or Africans is that correct
predominant no there's some other places
as well but predominantly places in
Africa and among African Americans or
people whose ancestors came from these
tropical climates where yes that's fair
that's really quite an amazing story so
there's no no no vaccine for
toxoplasmosis is there anything on the
horizon is there anything being worked
on because that's a big one right it's a
real big problem among people with
hiv/aids for instance that's a because
it reactivates your toxoplasmosis and we
even see it in even seen in kids
sometimes but the thing is activates it
how so well what happens is it's in some
countries up to 30% of people are
actually infected with Toxoplasma and
the parasite has the ability to undergo
a dormancy state in the body until your
immune system gets compromised either
because of AIDS or because if you get
some kind of medicine that suppresses
your immune system and then it can
reactivate it and cause what's called
cerebral toxoplasmosis which is quite
serious
so most people handle their
toxoplasmosis very well you know you die
with it and don't even know you have it
but in some cases it gets reactivated
right now there doesn't seem to be a lot
of incentive for developing a
toxoplasmosis fax you know though I'd be
very interested to work on something
like well how would there be no
incentive it's such a large-scale
disease it's hundreds of millions people
worldwide right that's right and part of
the problems we have almost no
information on the actual number of
people who have it and how extensive it
is so we call that disease burden we
don't have good disease burden estimates
of toxoplasmosis I'm sorry you're tested
I've had a bunch of cats I've had feral
cats yeah you preach and I'm crazy well
it's a good chance your your are
infected but your immune systems intact
then you're okay now there is a related
disease that from cats called toxic or
Isis and that's a parasitic worm
infection we're finding in the United
States among the poor and that's a
warrant so what happens is if you go
into poor neighborhoods you know and you
see a lot of feral cats and dogs and
poor neighborhoods
almost a hundred percent of them have
this worm in their intestines and
they're seating the environment with
eggs and their feces and the feces are
spread all over the poor neighborhoods
kids come into contact with them and the
worm has the ability to migrate through
the brain across cerebral toxic arises
and I think it's an important cause of
developmental delays it's one of those
neglected diseases in the US and about
in the book and there's no vaccine for
that there's no vaccine for and we need
a very little awareness about it
Wow yeah I've never even heard of it
until just now right so this is not rare
I mean in some cases you know up to 10%
of certain populations like Africa
African Americans living in poverty are
infected with it and it's primarily pets
or is it rodents as well mostly stray
dogs and snot even pets it's mostly
stray dogs and cats and and I get right
and this is an example of a neglected
tropical disease here's here's a disease
of up to 10% of African Americans living
in poverty in the United States and
almost nobody is studying it Wow right
and it can affect the way your mind
functions right it's been and it's been
linked now to developmental delays so
you know everybody wants to know why you
know kids living in poverty have
developmental delays and people just
assume it's because they live in
deprived environments and that sort of
thing but I think toxic crisis is an
important underlying reason for it
and this is an example of a neglected
disease you know we I mean everybody's
heard of Ebola right and everyone's
worried about Ebola and and the truth is
Ebola is never gonna come to the United
States why is it never gonna because
it's too difficult to transmit unless
you have a complete collapse in the
health system we're never gonna have
Ebola epidemics in the United States but
here's a disease of 10% of African
Americans living in poverty and no one's
heard of it and there's no incentive to
study it so that's why I'm trying to
raise awareness about these poverty
related diseases and that'sthat's
correctly I understand why people don't
talk about that one yeah that one seems
insane right yeah absolutely it's a
no-brainer right and so but you know
it's very hard to get people to care
about diseases of poverty and this is
one of the striking things about when I
wrote the book was you know I've had a
lot of success getting people to care
about neglected tropical diseases in
Africa and worked with the US Agency for
International Development to support a
package of medicines that's now being
administered to over a billion people
annually and now you know as one of my
proudest accomplishments is is helping
to raise awareness about
neglected tropical disease like we've
been talking about it look Worman
schistosomiasis in Africa Asia Latin
America but the minute I talk about
poverty related diseases in the US the
lights go up why is that I don't know I
can't what am i I can't figure out what
I'm doing wrong I've had so much success
getting people to care about NTDs
neglected tropical diseases and in poor
developing countries but you know
there's been no response to this book I
mean it is and and the estimates that I
come up on the Booker we have twelve
million Americans live in poverty with a
neglected tropical disease toxic or Isis
is one of them another one is Jacques
disease and and the list goes on it's
been very hard to get people to care
about the poor in this country that's
very strange to me and I've always said
that about the way we treat other
countries we want to send them aid and
rebuild these countries but we don't do
anything about these terrible
communities that have been terrible in
this country for a decade upon decade
right and so I try to make the point the
world has changed you know this this old
norm of global health developed versus
developing it still exists but it's
going away we're what we're seeing is
our general rise in all all economies in
some African countries of eight or nine
percent economic growth but that's all
leaving behind a bottom segment of
society and so I don't care where you
show me poverty whether it's in Texas or
Alabama or Nigeria or Bangladesh I will
show you these poverty related diseases
and you know I I know what's your name
AOC the congresswoman from New York has
talked a little bit about hookworm in
Alabama so last time I was in Washington
I dropped off a copy of the book in her
office but no response yet well she's
probably pretty busy too yeah she's
doing a lot of others if you had a magic
wand and someone said you could do
whatever you want to fix this what would
you do so I I did meet with a couple of
people on the hill and and they asked me
that question what's the magic wand and
there's a couple of things one we need
to actually look for these diseases
because the problem is they're the the
disease that caused a very subtle like
developmental delays
so that if you're you know a kid who
lives in poverty with developmental
delays the pediatrician doesn't even
think to do a test for toxic arises so
that so we need to raise awareness we
need to go into poor communities across
the country and actually take a blood
test and actually measure for the
presence of that disease or that
parasite once you find that disease what
would you do that well it depends on the
disease in some cases we have treatments
for him like the treatment for toxic
rias's is a five day course of a simple
pill of albendazole and it cures it and
it cures it so really yeah so that we
have you know we have interventions so
one you know doing what I call active
surveillance looking for these diseases
the other one is really trying to
understand how these diseases are
transmitted what is it about poor
neighborhoods that is facilitating
transmission I think the third problem
is the diagnostic test themselves
because they're very complicated tests
sometimes you know they're done at the
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention our lab or our National
School of Tropical Medicine does a few
of them but it's not like you know when
you go for a you go for blood work and
your doctor and you get a little lab
slip from quest Diagnostics with the you
know the blood chemistry's the blood
counts there's no box there for toxic
Rises and Jacques to see so we need more
improved test point of care diagnostic
tests not just improved tests but just
let me make it more accessible yeah and
so they don't have to send it off to the
CDC or to you know our National School
of Tropical Medicine is their treatment
for talk so there is a treatment for
toxoplasmosis what is it
it's parama that means sulfa drug but it
requires a long treatment course how
long I'd have to look up the number of
days I haven't treated a patient with
toxoplasmosis in a while but and it
kills it effectively he can yeah really
yeah oh I thought it was something you
kept for life well if you don't get
treated right okay so and then if your
immune compromised and it comes back
then that that's a problem as well so
most people that have it really don't
even know they have that's right yeah
and actually and most people who have
neglected tropical diseases don't know
they have it either
so that in the end Texas for instance we
have transmission of a parasitic disease
called Jacques disease it's a cause of
heart disease we you know are members of
our faculty were actually able to track
down individuals who had donated blood
and the Gulf Coast Regional blood
authority actually found somebody people
positive for Jacques disease they were
told to go see their primary health care
provider and then unfortunately the
primary health care provider is not
educated about these diseases and they
just assume must be a false positive so
you know our faculty had tracked them
down and were able to get them into
treatment and what is the treatment for
Chagas it's a it's a an anti-parasitic
agent called Benson it is all and that
kills it that can kill if you catch it
early enough but sometimes you don't
catch it early so if it becomes systemic
then you have then that's why we're
trying to develop a therapeutic vaccine
for this disease oh but again it's a
therapeutic vaccine for a
poverty-related disease so it's it's
very tough ma'am so the point is these
diseases are widespread among the poor
and we just don't pay attention to them
yeah that's great and so I think you
know again I'd love to hear your
thoughts I mean what is it that we just
turn our backs on the poor in this
country it's it's disturbing it's very
dismissive value and and and they
disproportionately affect people of
color as well right yeah because you
know because it's so linked to poverty
well also right slavery yeah I mean the
history of slavery in this country in
the history of systemic racism in places
where they just literally would not sell
homes to people who are african-american
all these things are connected to the
the contribution of maintaining these
impoverished communities and there's
been almost no effort whatsoever other
than the people living in the community
trying to do better and raise everybody
up right there's been no effort
whatsoever by the federal government to
step in and try to rehabilitate like a
large scale approach to rehabilitating
places like the ghettos of Houston or
Baltimore or you know I thought I knew
what poverty living at I was before I
moved to Texas in 2011 I was chair of
microbiology at George Washington
University and I thought I thought I
knew what poverty looked like I moved
down to the Gulf Coast it's a different
animal I mean the the depth and breadth
of poverty in the Gulf Coast in the
southern part of the United States is
just extraordinary and it's been very
hard to get people to want to really
take it on and really address these
these poverty related diseases do you
think what do you think the cause of it
is I mean if you've you've studied this
for quite a while well the cause of did
neglect yes yeah I don't know I don't
know you know is it something about
American exceptionalism or something
like we just don't want to admit we have
poor people I don't know you know I
wasn't the first to come up you know to
raise this issue about poverty when I
was in high school or junior high school
I was forced to read a book and at the
time I didn't care about it was called
the other America it was written by
fantastic social activist named Michael
Harrington who was I think someone come
he's a very devout Catholic actually so
and he wrote this book called the other
America talks about the hidden poverty
off the road and the actual number of
people who live in extreme poverty
hasn't changed since that book was
written in the early 60s that book was
helped was what helped Lyndon first
Kennedy than Lyndon Johnson launched the
war on poverty in 1964 I dusted off that
book and it still it still works today
and that's how I started out talking
about my book blue marble health about
that book the other America by Michael
Harrington yeah that is a very strange
thing our acceptance of these
communities and I mean I've always said
that if you want to make America a
better place the best thing to do is not
invade other countries or intervene the
best thing to do is try to rebuild these
impoverished communities yeah well
Gandhi Gandhi people way out Gandhi once
said a civilization is judged by the
treatment of its minorities and yes
we're not you know by that criteria
we're not doing so well you know the we
our country was visited by the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on poverty
into 2017 and his numbers came up with
we have 19 point
four million Americans who live in
what's called extreme poverty that is at
half the u.s. poverty line and roughly
around five million Americans living on
less than $2 a day the same benchmark
you'd use for global poverty everywhere
million yeah and and guess what those
probably all have neglected tropical
diseases five just just like just like
those living in extreme poverty in
Africa and if I'd only people living on
$14 a week to two dollars a day yeah
that's insane yeah
the University of Michigan center on
poverty is also shown that we have
I forget the number 2.7 million families
living in less than $2 a day which is
probably about the same as the five
million number Jesus Christ
yeah and again this is not a topic that
is very popular I mean when when you see
presidential debates this is not
something common Oh buddy talks about it
and again even for disease I mean who
what are the diseases we hear about
Ebola and and lot of diseases like that
and sometimes on my frustration I say
you know where these are imaginary
diseases and yet here we've got
widespread diseases of the poor in the
US and the lights go out you remember
when that woman came back from Africa
and she was a nurse and she had been
some in some connection contacted with
Ebola she didn't have it and they wanted
a quarantine here oh yeah and they they
stuck around in some cabin and the
airport or something crazy terrible you
know what did you think about that I
just thought it was so cruel is it just
ignorant of how handsome it is right how
its transmitted well actually Ebola you
know it turns out is the opposite of
measles measles one of those contagious
disease is known it has a reproductive
number of 12 to 18 what that means if a
single individual gets measles 12 to 18
others get it because the virus hangs
around in the environment and it's so
easily transmissible hangs around like
if you touch this tables right that's
right or even in the Aven and the
atmosphere so and that's why you get
these really large measles outbreaks
like you're seeing in Washington State
and and usually those are infants under
the age of 12 months not yet old enough
Dave
the ones waiting to hospitalized and
then sick the Ebola is just the opposite
Ebola is a reproductive number of two or
three so unless you're taking care of a
dead or dying Ebola patient or someone
who's recently died because it's only
towards the end stage of the disease
that you really get large numbers of
virus particles in the body you're not
going to get Ebola so the reason is
being so hard right now to contain a
Democratic Republic of Congo it's not
because it's so highly contagious it's
just that
the place is decimated by the collapse
and infrastructure associated with civil
war so even though we have now an Ebola
vaccine it's hard to vaccinate everybody
and how is it transmitted Ebola by
contact with fluids of somebody with
with Ebola so it has to get into your
tissue so right now oh what else should
we worry about you're freaking me out
the point is a lot of these diseases are
solvable if if we just put our mind to
it so are these or even aware of it one
of the things I say in the book is if
because these diseases are so widespread
among the poor in the g20 countries if
we could get the elected or the leaders
of those g20 countries together to g20
summit and say we're really going to do
something about the neglected diseases
in our own borders and I will include
the United States we could get rid of
two-thirds of the world's party related
neglected diseases right off the bat Wow
so a lot of it is political will
ignorant or lack of awareness and
political will well it seems like in
this country ignorant is a big part of
it because this is something I've
thought about many times but I didn't
know about cha God and know about a lot
of these a disease you're describing
yeah no I mean so we need to raise
awareness about these that's why I'm so
thrilled so thrilled to come here
because I've just amplified the number
of people who have heard of this concept
of blue marble health yeah the name that
I've given a different name from global
health to two separate separated from
the two so you know coming on here is so
powerful in terms of amplifying that
mess
so again back to the magic wand but what
could be done I mean is it a funding
issue or is it at first before that an
education issue well I think there's
multiple issues so I mean if again with
the the drivers we've been talking today
about promoting these diseases really
tough to do anything about extreme
poverty war and conflict climate change
climate change clearly there are certain
things we can do aggressive unchecked
urbanization but the other things that
you can do is build better tools by
vitami better Diagnostics better drugs
better vaccines and unfortunately for
these poverty related diseases there's
no market incentive for it so it falls
to academics to professors to people
trying to do this in the nonprofit
sector and we're doing the best we can
but it's not nearly as good as having
access to getting the pharmaceutical
companies involved as well it also seems
like the it would this would cost an
insane amount of money to just go
through all these poor communities test
everyone and start distributing these
these drugs and what would pay for all
that stuff well you know some people
have asked me to low what would the
Affordable Care Act take care of this
and I said well we're two steps away
from the Affordable we're two to two
standard deviation to standard deviation
two degrees of separation away from the
Affordable Care Act because we're not
even Harry recognizing these diseases
yeah you got to know about it first I
mean most what percentage of the
population even knows about right all
these parasite created diseases or know
that vaccines don't cause autism
yeah well that one is it that that's the
biggest one yeah I mean that's a tough
one and again I don't understand it I
mean I'm just saying it I'm saying
vaccines don't cause autism because
you're saying it right you know and then
I think this is the part of the boat is
a lot of peope are the problem we're in
this boat a bunch of people who are
scientifically illiterate like myself
we're discussing these issues who don't
really know what they're talking about
someone talked about tetanus because
some boy
had tetanus hmm and he was in the
hospital for a long time and his his
bill was hospital bills like a million
dollars good yeah yeah well because it's
an ICU admission right right and they
were saying hey you know why didn't this
kid get a tetanus shot and it get it
goes back to the same thing right that
people don't want these vaccines yeah
any prevented and again I don't blame
the parents I think the parents in some
ways are victims themselves our victim
of this very aggressive misinformation
right I mean that's out there tetanus is
a big one though isn't it yeah tetanus
and we have a vaccine for it that's part
of the what's called the DPT that's what
are the first vaccines you get as an
infant there's no excuse for having a
tetanus case in the United States right
and this kid was unvaccinated right yeah
that's my understanding
yeah I mean is there a cure for tetanus
outside of vaccines well I mean there
are supportive measures that you can do
but you know they require
hospitalization ventilation putting on a
respirator means it's a band you could
still die so it's a it's an awful awful
disease I've seen tetanus working in
Central America and elsewhere you see a
case of tetanus you never forget it
what is tightness technically well the
other name is lockjaw where your muscles
go into spasm and and you can including
the muscles involved in breathing so you
can't even breathe as a result of an
impairment it freezes the muscles what
what is doing it what's doing is it's
parris it's actually a caused by a
bacteria the bacteria releases a toxin
called tetanus toxin oh that's sounds
like a horrible way to go it's a
terribly sorrowful diseases and I think
one of the things that the NT vaccine
group or Lobby as I call it does is they
try to be very dismissive of these
diseases they try to deliberately
downplay the effects I mean you'll see
this stuff on the web measles build your
immune system yeah you said it yourself
so I didn't read it yeah I just saw it
yeah it's crap right yeah and what are
they saying what is what is the first
thing it's just a rash it builds your
immune system it makes you stronger it's
it's it's something out of
a different planet I don't know where
their Co we do though I think the reason
for that becoming popular is because you
we do kind of helicopter parent our kids
a little bit too much they should come
in contact with a bunch of different
things because it does build their
immune system correct
well that's an interesting hypothesis
called the hygiene hypothesis that says
you know a few kids are living in too
sterile environment then this can also
result in autoimmune diseases and things
like that but it's allergies allergies
and I have mixed feelings about the
hypothesis to me it's not not airtight
by any means yeah you're tight but it's
there's there's some sort of a
correlation particularly between peanut
allergies and keeping peanuts away from
children and that there was a study
showing those Jonathan hates work in one
of his books talked about how there was
a study done in communities where they
didn't protect kids from peanut
allergies and this much smaller
percentage of people developing peanut
allergies versus kids that they did yeah
well this is also one of the things that
the into vaccine lobbies doing now that
they're you know and when I write a book
like this vaccines don't cause autism
now what you're seeing remember I told
you about that whack-a-mole business
where they went from MMR tooth is all to
spacing vaccines too close together to
aluminum now there's some groups that
are moving away from autism altogether
and now they're saying well vaccines
cause autoimmune disease or vaccines
cause other neurologic deficits but it's
all it's all flim-flam it's all from
what is but there are there are vaccine
courts though right in vaccine there are
vaccine courts and they have handed out
payments to people who were injured by
vaccines right what what is that so you
know it was for instance if you look
over a 10-year period I think it is
between and haven't looked at the
numbers in a while I think it's between
2008 and 2014 2015 over that period of
time there were 2.5 billion doses of
vaccine given 2.5 billion of which the
vaccine courts identified around 200
that were a list of serious injuries
that could be that they have a
Abell love that they could attribute to
vaccines so there were 2,000 payouts on
of those 2,000 80% they didn't really
think we're attributed to vaccines but
they paid it out anyway because that's
how the courts work and then 200 where
they could really say yeah it looks like
this could be related to vaccine so you
divide 200 by 2.5 billion that's one in
10 million or even 2,000 by 2.5 billions
it's one in a million and these cases
what was happening to these people other
than the shoulder injury that you were
talking about yeah there's a there's a
list and I talked about it in the book
there's actually a table you can
download on the web of each vaccine a
list of potential injuries that they
allow and these potential injuries is it
as we were talking about earlier is this
just biological variability that some
people just react differently to
different things I think in some cases
we don't know in other cases you know
with the live virus vaccines if you have
a severe genetic immune deficiency and
maybe it wasn't picked up then then
there is that risk but you know what's
what's the one-in-a-million what's the
one in a 10 million risk as I said we
have to keep that in perspective because
the gods are getting hit by lightning is
one in a 700 thousand and you believe
that number or you know what's the risk
every time you take your child out in a
car and drive around the neighborhood
I'm sure the risk is far higher than one
in a million and the real danger is
these actual infectious disease is
spreading and the damage they could do
damage things like that they're coming
back yeah yeah yeah meet me Szell's is
it as an awful disease causes measles
encephalitis measles pneumonia I find
that a lot of people that are that are
steadfast in their resistance to
vaccines they they also believe in a lot
of other questionable things it seems
like these things get lumped into these
groups of things that they don't trust
the government about right right yeah I
think that's part I think that's
probably true
yeah that's which was she government
which was which was in turmoil you know
it was interesting so you know I said we
know we need to hear from the Centers
for Disease Control more in the Surgeon
General now the
starting to speak out but you know
people counter that's a well part of the
problems people don't trust their
government I say that's true of some but
I think most people if you know if we
had a you know more visible public
health force out there people would
listen to it well I think that what
you're talking about in terms of these
poor neighborhoods in these parasites
getting into people's system and
infecting cognitive development and but
it was the other one besides chaga it
was the Toxocara assist the process
cognitive develop and the fact that
there is actual cures for these things
to I mean that I estimated in a paper
there are 2.8 million African Americans
living in poverty with toxic horizons
Wow this is not a rare disease Joe this
is this is a common disease but it's so
unknown but it's occurring among the
poor and ironic and debilitating
infection it's not dramatic it's not not
Ebola it's not healing people is this
mostly and this is requirements as well
it's probably it's more in common in the
south than in the north is it because
they have long longer time to do this
yeah as the eggs are of the eggs are and
the environment and the worm develops
with it within the egg is there any
other diseases that are going wrong that
we don't know about yeah yeah sure
there's other there's a brain parasitic
infection called cysticercosis
that one is from eggs often from
individuals who have a tapeworm so
that's we're seeing cases of that
there's some of the viruses transmitted
by mosquitoes one of the ones we don't
talk about a lot which is a very serious
infection is West Nile virus infection
hmm that's got very high rates of not
only encephalitis but also are one of
our faculty members Christy Murray is
showing very high rates of depression
and other neurologic debilitation for
and that's another one we could probably
use a vaccine for but there isn't the
market incentive to do it West Nile
virus does come up though that least
that's discussed in the news and people
aware of it right right said it right
but there's no vaccine there's no
vaccine but there could be what is it
there could be I was holding it back
what's holding it back is lack of market
forces lack of financial incentive for
the pharmaceutical companies to take it
on so
there's an extremely large investment to
develop something along those lines
that's right yeah I mean vaccines are
for an investor's perspective tough sell
because you know there's a possibility
you know first of all you need many
years of clinical trials it can
sometimes take two decades from the
original conception of a vaccine to
actually going through a clinical trial
so the hookworm vaccine I've been
working on we've been doing it since the
1990s so we're talking decades long time
horizons when you talk to an investor
about something with decades long time
horizons you know I figure it out right
the light the lights go out I mean very
very quickly so where it gets gross
right because this is all we're relying
on these private businesses to invest
money to cure a public health issue
that's right that's right that seems
kind of crazy well so in response to
that what happened was after the Ebola
Fiasco in 2014 where we didn't have an
Ebola vaccine in Guinea Liberia and
Sierra Leone a group of individuals came
together at Davos the World Economic
Forum and including the Gates Foundation
and they put around they've developed
this concept or which an organization
called sepi the Coalition for epidemic
preparedness innovation to incentivize
biotechs and pharmaceutical companies to
embark on diseases for which of pandemic
potential like ebola like Lassa fever
like mares corona virus infection and
that was great but the problem was they
didn't address these poverty related
diseases so those of us who were working
on poverty related diseases are still
kind of on the outside looking in it
just seems like having everything
managed by private companies that need
to they need to have some sort of a
financial incentive to attack these
diseases that seems like a crazy way to
deal with health crisis that's right
that's right and so what I've
recommended as I said this set that
organization sepi is great for what it's
doing but we need another mechanism what
I've proposed is that since these
diseases are so common among the poor in
the jeat
any countries these are the 20 largest
economies to put together public sector
funds for that purpose public sector
funds for investing in developing
vaccines and treatments for poverty
related diseases these chronic
debilitating diseases and in fact you
know we can show that the using working
with health economists we actually work
with a terrific health economist his
name is Bruce Lee evolved of all names
huh he's that professor at Johns Hopkins
Yeah right he loves it and he said he's
been able to show that our vaccines are
not only cost effective they're cost
savings meaning that they're
economically dominant that they'll
actually save money the problem is you
still doesn't help you with the fact
that you still need some but the return
is on public health
you still need somebody to come along
and provide that investment yes you know
so what's happened is our our technical
ability to develop vaccines has
outstripped our our our financial
instruments that we have to do it so I
get a stream of young people in my
office wanting to go into global health
I mean the commitment for this next
generation I know they get a lot of bad
press but my impression is this next
generation their commitment to public
service is at an all-time high and they
say you know dr. Hotez I'm all-in I'm
gonna go into global health and they're
a little bit disappointed when I tell
them get an MBA or get a law degree
because where we need the innovation now
is in the is in the finance sector
there's a there must be a business model
out there that would work that would
figure out how to how to do this I just
don't have the background to do it it
seems like once the momentum is in the
corner of this being handled by the
private sector and that the private
sector has to develop these vaccines and
these treatments and they have to do it
with some sort of financial incentive if
they don't have a bucket of gold at the
end of the rainbow they're not going to
take a ride that's right that's right so
look that's crazy it's great but that's
the reality and so what the exciting
thing about what I do is you know
developing these vaccines for poverty
related diseases there's no road map
right now there were in clinical trials
I don't know what the road map
is to get to licensure and getting these
vaccines out to the public the
terrifying thing the thing keeps me up
at night is there's no room
there's how much does it cost to get a
vaccine I mean in general from
developmental period to actual
application
well the pharmaceutical companies have
traditionally said billions but I don't
think that's the case I think one of the
reasons you they're doing that is
because they're also recovering their
R&D costs you know they're putting money
into our right that they that they that
they charge in order to you know either
make a profit or at least a Eve and so
for instance the cervical cancer vaccine
the HPV vaccine that you know when I
last look was $420 for the three doses
it doesn't take cost $420 to make that
vaccine it's just that they're
recovering their R&D costs which is
which is fair enough so one of the
things that we're proposing to do for
our neglected disease vaccines is we'll
delink the rnd cost another was if we've
gotten grants whether it's from the
Gates Foundation in the past or or the
NIH or the European Union or the Dutch
government or the Carlos Slim foundation
we're not gonna pass those costs on
we'll just you know that was used for
R&D and we would just cost for the cost
of good so at least we can get it down
to just a couple of dollars a dose a few
dollars of those now for anybody that's
listed in this conversation and they
have additional questions where's the
best place that you should guide them it
would it be your books probably the
books because I wrote the books for lay
audiences my lay audiences sort of I
mean and somebody with a call University
education but I mean they're not you
know it's they're they're published by
Johns Hopkins University Press so and
they are kind of they're uneven in terms
of how weighty they get into the science
but certainly the vaccines not cause
Rachel's autism I wrote it with the idea
of parents vaccine hesitancy and also
the pediatricians because the other
problem with pediatricians is you know
they're there in their office
parents are reading this stuff on
internet and they come and loaded loaded
for bear into the pediatricians office
with all these factoids and the
pediatrician was like well gee I never
heard that before and and then the
pediatrician is made to feel stupid like
he's not keeping up with the science he
is or she is but it's just they're not
keeping up with the misinformation so I
provide talking points in the epilogue
of the book and Blue Marble health is
the best resource for people to
understand the about disease of the poor
in wealthy countries then I have a third
book that I wrote a few years ago called
forgotten people forgotten diseases that
describes with neglected tropical
diseases well I really hope that what
comes out of this is someone gets
motivated to create some sort of a
documentary really on both subjects I
mean I think that we greatly benefit
from some clarity for people that do
have concern about autism that's in a
digestible form for good or for bad
people like to watch documentaries right
and I hope you don't get too beat up
over this because I know the
anti-vaccine groups are very passionate
and well I mean they don't have a
position they don't know they would beat
me up well that's well they beat me up a
lot well I'm sure they'd go after you
and they already call me a shill
they call me a shill for a lot of things
though you know being leaving the round
earth jamie has a t-shirt that he sells
at young Jamie comets round earth shell
great literally I've been called a round
earth shell and the earth is flat
there's a lot of those ya know if you
know I didn't know that there's a lot so
you get beat up no matter what if you're
talking but so but I really think it
would get be it would do a good service
if somebody did put together a
documentary because I don't think most
people are aware I think most people are
just relying on this fear like that
vaccines do cause autism there's also
this connection between people that are
older correct when when they're older
and they have children there seems to be
a more likely there seems to be and that
may be related to as you get older your
sperm or your egg have some genetic
instability and more likely to produce
mutation yes that's probably the Mac and
that would go hand-in-hand
yeah the genetic basis of autism and
then the blue marble health book I mean
what you've been saying today about
these diseases and how
many of them exist and how many of them
are almost unknown untreated right
undiagnosed and just how many people are
unaware I really hope that someone does
something about that too but in the
meantime people can buy your books are
they available in audio as well
definitely the vaccines do not cause
Rachel's autism is audiobooks and I'm
not sure about Blue Marble health okay
but you can get it on Amazon thanks for
being here I appreciate it it's good to
see you again well thank you for raising
awareness of all this stuff I really
appreciate leisure my pleasure and I
appreciate you coming down here and
explaining a lot of this stuff for us
it's been a great time I really enjoyed
the opportunity if people want to get a
hold you on Twitter what is your Twitter
just an app Peter Hotez okay thanks our
appreciate you
[Music]